(♪♪)
>> Tom: It's morning at
"Marketplace".
(♪♪)
>> Tom: -- Spillage there.
And we've invited these viewers
over to put one of their
favourite morning rituals to the
test.
>> Are you ready for this?
>> Tom: A taste test, to be
exact.
>> This is the best time of day
to taste anything.
>> Tom: Like most of you, this
bunch love to start the day with
a glass of orange juice.
>> I will say I do have the one
glass a day.
>> Tom: But if they're thinking
it's all sunshine and
vitamins ...
(♪♪)
>> Tom: We're about to pop some
balloons...
Good morning all.
>> Morning.
>> Tom: And spill some juicy
secrets.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: In front of each of our
tasters, six samples of orange
juice and one simple question:
which juice tickles their taste
buds best?
Rate each one, and then at the
end decide which one you think
is the freshest tasting one.
Sound fairly straightforward?
>> Yes.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Helping us out is Konrad
Edjbick.
Now the fruit of the vine is
his usual choice...
But this wine expert says
judging juice of any kind
isn't all that different.
>> What I'm looking for is a
sense of life, a natural fruit,
in this case orange.
I want no aspect of chemistry
or artificiality.
That's what I'm looking for.
>> Tom: Our testers have no
labels to read.
Though you will soon...
And no idea which brand of
O.J. they're tasting.
>> It's kinda cheap tasting
and a little bit stale.
>> It hasn't been squeezed
five minutes ago, that's for
sure.
Like, this might be from
concentrate, I don't know.
>> Tom: So far, it's a
guessing game.
But Wayne Gueran and his
daughters are hoping this test
will help peel back some
answers.
(♪♪)
>> We love our orange juice!
>> Tom: The Gueran family
(♪♪)
doesn't just love their O.J.
>> Tom: The Gueran family
They guzzle it down to the
doesn't just love their O.J.
tune of six cartons a month.
They guzzle it down to the
That's 50 glasses between them.
tune of six cartons a month.
Their fridge isn't just running;
That's 50 glasses between them.
it's getting a workout.
Their fridge isn't just running;
>> I want the Tropicana.
it's getting a workout.
>> I got it first!
>> I want the Tropicana.
>> Tom: But you don't drink
>> I got it first!
that much O.J. without noticing
>> Tom: But you don't drink
a thing or two.
that much O.J. without noticing
>> That's all that's in it.
a thing or two.
100% orange juice.
>> That's all that's in it.
>> Tom: Like the promise of
100% orange juice.
"pure" and "natural" juice.
>> Tom: Like the promise of
>> No sugar or water added.
"pure" and "natural" juice.
>> Tom: So he's got one simple
>> No sugar or water added.
question for us...
>> Tom: So he's got one simple
>> Why does the orange juice
question for us...
in the store that I buy taste so
>> Why does the orange juice
different than freshly squeezed?
in the store that I buy taste so
>> Tom: Good question, Wayne.
different than freshly squeezed?
The O.J. Wayne's asking about
>> Tom: Good question, Wayne.
are the premium brands such as
The O.J. Wayne's asking about
these...
are the premium brands such as
Most of us believe they're
these...
better than frozen concentrate.
Most of us believe they're
That's O.J. where water's been
better than frozen concentrate.
taken out then put back in.
That's O.J. where water's been
"Marketplace" commissions a
taken out then put back in.
poll and finds 58% of Canadian
"Marketplace" commissions a
O.J. fans believe premium brands
poll and finds 58% of Canadian
are more natural than juices
O.J. fans believe premium brands
made from concentrate.
are more natural than juices
And say they're willing to pay
made from concentrate.
more for that difference; up
And say they're willing to pay
to twice as much.
>> It's the best.
>> I bet you it's my Tropicana
because I haven't had it this
morning.
I waited.
(laughing)
>> Tom: You were holding up
for it.
Good.
>> That's it.
That's it.
>> Tom: So how natural is
premium O.J.?
How you doing, Wayne?
>> Good, how are you?
>> Tom: Good, thanks.
So you're into number two.
What do you think of it?
>> It's just one of the secrets
we're after at our taste test.
>> It tastes very sweet.
That aroma knocks you out.
(laughing)
>> It really does.
>> Tom: Wait a minute.
What's in that orange juice?
Oh!
Jeez.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Juices are sampled.
Tongues swirled.
Notes scribbled.
>> Three smells really bad
though.
>> Tom: Our group doesn't know
it, but our six samples
breakdown this way.
Two are from concentrate.
Three not from concentrate.
And our secret weapon, a glass
of freshly squeezed.
>> Pretty weak.
>> Tom: It's all orange juice.
Officially, at least.
But our testers say they do
taste different from each other.
>> It's the smell from my youth.
>> Tom: Right, mine, too.
Why is that?
We've got a secret expert in
the room with the first clue.
>> Orange juice manufacturers
are trying to now imitate the
taste of processed orange
juice rather than the real
thing.
>> Tom: The real thing.
>> Right.
>> Tom: Alissa Hamilton loves
oranges.
She just doesn't like what the
juice industry does to them.
And she should know because
she's written a book on it,
called "Squeezed: What You
Don't Know About Orange Juice."
>> The orange juice industry
has definitely profited from the
idea that this is a simple,
natural, direct product.
>> Tom: Is orange juice natural?
>> You can squeeze it at home,
and you're getting a natural
juice.
But most of the juices that
you're buying in the store are
heavily processed and
engineered.
>> Tom: Engineered?
That's not a word the big
orange juice makers use.
>> Here's wonderful news for you
and me, that Minute Maid gives
more Vitamin C.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: This is how juice makers
have sold it for decades.
As if oranges fall off the tree
and into your carton.
>> There are 16 fresh picked
oranges squeezed into each
cartoon of Tropicana Pure
Premium.
>> Tom: 100% pure.
100% natural.
From "grove to glass."
>> Simply orange.
Honestly simple.
>> Tom: But the truth is
really not that simple.
If juice makers told you the
real deal, here's how a
commercial might look.
Come join me.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: By the time O.J.
reaches your table, this
miracle of nature has become a
miracle of manipulation.
The oranges are plucked from
their perch.
And land on an assembly line.
Where they're sprayed and
squeezed into juice.
Next, it's here for
pasteurization.
Heating up.
And then on to huge tanks where
the juice can be stored for
months, sometimes up to a
year.
The oxygen is taken out so
nothing goes bad.
But one, pretty important
quality "does" go: most of the
orange flavour.
So how do they put it back in?
Juice makers use something
called flavour packs.
Okay.
Hang on a second.
So you're saying they make so
much orange juice and store it
for so long and then they have
people add flavour to it later?
>> Exactly.
>> Tom: How?
>> I asked for the precise time
when the flavour is added.
It's added -- I was actually
told "we'd have to shoot you if
we told you that."
So...
>> Tom: What?
>> There's a lot of secrecy
around, you know, around what
they do because they don't
want this to be perceived as a
heavily processed product.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: It's a secret formula
for making money.
In Canada, worth almost half a
billion dollars in sales.
Pepsi, which makes Tropicana,
got almost two-thirds of that.
Simply orange.
So how much added flavour are
we buying?
What do you think?
That over the...
>> That looks good.
>> Tom: To figure it out,
associate producer Anu and I
are packing up samples,
getting ready to send them off
to a lab.
How'd I do?
>> M'mm.
I think mine's better.
>> Tom: Hey, wait a minute!
I'm the host!
Flavour packs are made up of
natural components of orange
essence and oils.
Broken down, mixed and
matched, then rebuilt by
chemists.
Flavour packs help juice taste
the same, year-round.
We're searching for one chemical
in particular.
Ethyl butyrate.
Juice makers know North
Americans like the smell and
equate it to a fresh squeezed
orange.
So they boost flavour with it.
We want to see for ourselves.
>> Okay.
They're both marked.
>> Tom: Among the brands going
to the lab?
Some from our taste test.
Tropicana, Simply Orange,
Canadian Brand Oasis.
With pulp.
Not a pulp guy myself.
You?
>> No?
I like a little pulp, yeah.
(blender whirring)
>> Tom: We also make freshly
squeezed, for a baseline.
>> Tom: All right.
Off to grandmother's house.
No, going to the lab.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Two weeks later we find
ethyl butyrate in all our
samples.
Now, the amount can vary
depending on the crop and time
of year.
But the premium juice?
All have levels higher than
freshly squeezed.
>> You can see it in the taste
test.
I could smell immediately
which one was fresh because it
was palpably different than,
the smell of it, than the
others.
And the same goes for the
taste.
>> Tom: Ethyl butyrate is
naturally occurring in oranges
anyway.
>> That's correct.
>> Tom: So what's the problem
with adding it later in the
process?
>> Well, you're not adding it
back in the concentrations
that exist in nature.
So what you're getting back in
these flavour packs is an
engineered product.
>> Tom: Back at our taste test,
we reveal how O.J. makers
boost flavour.
The fact is that it's made in a
very different way.
They add flavour.
What do you think of that?
>> On a lot of the packages it
says made from pure 100%
orange juice.
No sugar added, no water added.
What is added?
So we should -- we should be
aware of that.
>> Tom: At the next table Alex
Herber can't believe what he's
hearing; or what he's drinking.
>> I'm angry.
I'm angry.
I feel duped.
That's 100%.
>> Tom: Why?
>> It's just -- I want to know
what's in my food and they're
telling me, "oh, look, it's
being picked off a tree," but
really it's not.
>> Tom: Freshly peeved, Alex
is about to become a student
on a mission.
When we come back...
>> Come on over and try our
smell test.
>> Tom: He's out to educate...
One squirt at a time?
>> Smells floral.
Floral and perfumey.
>> Tom: That's orange juice.
>> That's orange juice?
>> Tom: Mm-hm.
And we expose how companies
avoid giving you the full story.
>> We deserve to know.
>> Tom: And we're not being
told.
>> And we're not being told.
>> Erica: And later...
Who's hungry?
We serve up the truth about
breakfast sandwiches.
>> Wow.
>> Tom: Don't skip our breakfast
facts.
Join us on Facebook and Twitter.
(♪♪)
>> Tom: Hey, Alex.
How you doing?
We're revealing juicy secrets
about your glass of O.J.
And "Marketplace" viewer Alex
Herber is giving us a hand.
Show us the way, Alex.
We've told him that premium
orange juice is heavily
processed and that flavour
packs are added.
It's all left a sour taste in
his mouth.
So now Alex is ready to reveal
the secrets that O.J. makers
don't want you to know.
>> There we go.
>> Tom: Excellent.
>> Come on over and try our
smell test.
Do you have a good nose?
>> We'll find out.
>> All right.
Ready.
So hold out your wrist and
give that a smell.
What do you think that is?
>> Tom: To help illustrate the
flavour story, we've put some
Tropicana in a perfume bottle
and put it alongside real
perfume.
>> I have the eau de toilette.
>> Tom: And I have the eau de
l'orange.
>> Smells floral.
Floral and perfumey.
>> Tom: That's orange juice.
>> That's orange juice?
>> Tom: Mm-hm.
What's the reason behind our
spray test?
>> It does smell natural.
>> Tom: It's another juicy
secret.
Turns out, the same company
that gives this perfume its
smell also gives this orange
juice its taste.
That's right.
The flavour packs are
fashioned by fragrance
companies.
But can our samplers sniff it
out?
>> Maybe like a little tangerine
or something like that?
>> Smells like oranges?
>> Well, this one definitely
smells more natural.
>> Tom: What if I told you
that the company that makes
the perfume smell so good
makes orange juice taste so
good?
Same company.
>> Oh.
Well, maybe that's not such a
good thing.
>> I'm not sure I believe you.
Because that and that should
not be the same.
I don't like that.
>> Tom: We explain to our
sniffers why their juice needs
freshening up and flavouring
up.
When orange juice is mass
produced, it's pasteurized and
heated, and then stored for
months, even a year, in huge
vats.
So that process strips it of
its flavour.
They add flavour late in the
process.
These are flavour packs that
our natural flavors created by
the fragrance companies that's
added to the process to make
the juice taste like orange
juice again.
>> Wow.
As an industrial model, I think
it's obviously impressive, but I
think in terms of a personal
level, I find it kind of
frightening.
>> I'll have to think about my
fresh orange juice.
Or my fresh orange juice in
the container that I pick up
every week.
>> Tom: Do you believe that?
>> Not any more.
>> I think I wanna buy my own
oranges and make juice myself.
>> I guess it should be on a
nutrition label perhaps.
>> Tom: But "added flavour" is
nowhere to be found on any
label.
Despite the fact that Canadian
Food Inspection Agency has
rules saying it should.
Our poll reveals Canadians
want the full story.
95% of orange juice fans believe
any added ingredient should be
included on the carton.
Our expert Alissa Hamilton
says O.J. makers owe us the
truth.
>> If you love your Tropicana
or whatever orange juice it is
that you like and you know
what you're getting and you
know what you're paying for,
fine.
But know what you're getting,
and we deserve to know.
>> Tom: And we're not being
told.
>> And we're not being told.
>> Cheers!
>> Tom: Alex Herber thinks
that's wrong.
He finds out one way to get
the CFIA to act is file a
complaint.
So he does.
>> Record a concern.
Food labelling.
All right.
Submit.
Let's see what happens.
>> Tom: As for the orange juice
makers?
They argue they're just putting
natural flavour back in juice
that was lost during processing.
And even though O.J. is more
science than nature, a label
doesn't need to reflect that
fact.
Meantime a long list of
American consumers is forcing
their hand.
Suing the big O.J. makers for
misleading them.
Charging premium prices for a
juice that's so processed.
No lawsuits here.
But when we ask the companies
from our taste test for an
on-camera interview, they say
"no."
Some people might feel that
they're being misled when
they're buying a premium
processed orange juice.
Are they?
Being misled?
>> Yes.
If they're thinking that it's
fresh squeezed, if they're
thinking this is what they're
getting, that image, yes,
they're being misled.
>> Tom: Juice makers may be
keeping silent, but their
secrets are out.
The only thing left to
reveal...
The engineered O.J. our tasters
liked best.
>> Oasis.
>> Oh, my god!
>> What?
>> Tom: So that's the
favourite premium but...
>> There's no substitute for
that aroma.
>> Total different taste.
>> Tom: Fresh squeezed gets
top ranking.
>> Like you get the, not just
the inside of the orange,
you'll get, like, the whole
thing.
Flavour.
>> Tom: A surprise twist
though...
Many say they'll stick to the
processed stuff.
>> The scent is so foreign to
me.
It's so foreign.
>> Fresh squeezed I always
thought was orangey-er.
And I don't know.
I'm not sure.
>> Tom: Yeah, yeah.
That's fine.
That's good.
So what did you think of the
last one?
>> Six, it tasted very much
like fresh orange juice, but
honestly, I get that it's fresh
I just didn't like it as much.
>> Tom: So the stuff that may
be out of a box, you prefer
than the one right out of the
orange.
>> Honestly, I guess I'm just
used to the whole marketed
flavour of orange juice that
fresh orange just doesn't do
it for me any more.
>> Tom: It apparently doesn't
do it for Wayne Gueran's
family either.
Even though they now know why
premium juice tastes different
from freshly squeezed.
>> After finding out which
orange juice was the pure
orange juice, and I may just
start doing that at home.
>> Tom: Making it freshly
squeezed?
>> Yes.
>> No!
(Laughter)
>> Tom: Maybe it's time to put
the squeeze on O.J. makers to
be...
Simply honest.
>> Erica: After the break...
>> 500?
>> Erica: How popular breakfast
sandwiches stack up.
>> Can you beat our breakfast
quiz?
Find out now at
cbc.ca/marketplace.
(♪♪)
>> Erica: A busy morning in
downtown Toronto.
You're on the move.
In a rush.
>> Erica: So how about
breakfast with "Marketplace"
on a Toronto streetcar!
(♪♪)
>> Erica: Hey, everyone!
We're serving up breakfast at
"Marketplace."
What's on the menu?
A hot trend; breakfast
sandwiches.
>> With every early morning
rise, you rub the sleep outta
your eyes.
>> Erica: Seems suddenly ads
for 'em are everywhere.
>> This is turkey?
Yeah, turkey sausage.
Good, right?
It's great.
>> Erica: You, too, can be the
picture of health, if you eat
the right breakfast sandwich?
>> (commercial): Breakfast
makes mornings real nice...
(♪♪)
>> Erica: We've got turkey,
sausage, bacon.
Breakfast sandwiches for
everyone!
Who's hungry?
>> I'll try sausage.
>> Can I have bacon?
>> I love breakfast
sandwiches.
>> Erica: What do you like
about a breakfast sandwiche?
>> Um, grab-and-go.
>> Erica: Handy for busy people
who don't have time, and that's
how they're sold to us.
What do you like about it?
>> It's quick.
It's easy.
Take it on the go.
>> Yum, yum, yum.
>> Erica: Small wonder the
industry's hungry to win you
over.
South of the border the first
meal of the day is a $42
billion dollar business, and
growing.
They look fresh and hot, but
which ones are a better way to
start the day?
We bite into three popular
choices from three of Canada's
biggest restaurant chains.
From Starbucks, the sausage and
cheddar sandwich on an English
muffin.
We've got McDonald's bacon and
egg on a whole grain bagel.
And Tim Hortons' turkey sausage
on a biscuit.
>> I would love to have the
Starbuck sausage.
>> Erica: Okay.
So there you go.
Tempting, but know how much
sodium's under that wrapper?
There's a whole bunch of sodium
in it.
Almost 1,000 milligrams.
>> Oh, my goodness.
That's not good!
>> Erica: Not good at all,
says nutritionist Leslie Beck.
>> Adults aged 19 to 50 need,
every day, only 1,500 milligrams
of sodium for health.
So if you have a breakfast
sandwich that's got 1,000
milligrams of sodium, you've
already consumed two-thirds of
your days' worth of sodium in
one meal.
>> Erica: The McDonald's
option?
Even more sodium!
And Tim's, tops the chart!
Too much of that?
>> Is linked with a greater
risk of high blood pressure,
stroke, kidney stones, and
maybe even obesity.
>> Erica: And what do these
commuters know about how much
fat these handheld breakfasts
are serving up?
That Tim Hortons' option?
21 grams of fat.
>> Now I don't want to eat it.
>> Erica: McDonald's bacon and
egg sandwich?
And Starbucks' sausage and
cheddar, both almost 30 grams
of fat!
And it's about half the fat
that someone should have in a
whole day.
>> Whoa.
Thank you.
>> Erica: And how do these
brekkies stack up when it
comes to counting calories?
There are more calories in it
than in a Big Mac!
>> Really?
>> Erica: Yep.
This McDonald's bacon and egg
on a multigrain bagel packs
610 calories!
80 more than a Big Mac.
>> I did not know that.
That is very gross to hear.
It's supposed to be a
breakfast sandwich.
It's just not a good way to
start the day.
>> Erica: As for the more
pricey Starbucks option?
This has 500 calories in it.
>> 500!
Wow!
I will do a lot of exercise to
burn it off!
>> Erica: Get off the streetcar
and walk to your destination.
(Laughing)
>> Erica: And that leaves our
Tim Hortons' sandwich.
Made with turkey.
>> Turkey is supposed to be
like the least fat meat.
>> That's what I heard, that
turkey is the best meat.
>> Erica: Is it?
We hit three drive-thrus to find
out.
I'd like a breakfast sandwich,
please.
Which one has fewer calories,
the bacon or the turkey
sausage?
>> Turkey sausage.
>> Erica: Turkey sausage.
>> Yeah.
>> I believe the turkey.
Bacon has more calories.
>> Erica: Sounds right but
the turkey sandwich is a bit
bigger so get bacon or turkey
on a biscuit and you're actually
taking in the same amount of
fat and calories!
>> They see turkey on the menu
and they think that's a
healthier choice but turkey
sausage is not turkey breast.
It's a processed meat so it's
going to have more sodium and
also more fat.
>> Erica: Since so many of us
still have to eat on the go,
how can we make better
choices?
>> If you're looking to save
calories, opt for an English
muffin because they are
smaller, there's less bread.
>> Erica: They all have an
English muffin option.
Like the Golden Arches' basic
egg Mcmuffin.
The breakfast sandwich that
started this craze more than
40 years ago.
It's got fewer than 300
calories.
>> The next thing, choose egg
whites if you want to cut
cholesterol and saturated fat.
That's definitely a lighter
choice.
>> Erica: Tim Hortons' egg
white breakfast sandwich, just
220 calories!
>> And skip the meat.
You don't need the meat in a
breakfast sandwich.
You're getting protein, but
unfortunately it's greasy,
salt-laden protein.
>> Erica: How about Starbucks'
spinach and feta wrap with egg
whites.
Also in the under-300 calories
club.
But spoiler alert; it's packing
with a lot of sodium!
>> Thank you very much.
>> Erica: Everyone's fed, for
better or worse.
So....
That's a wrap on breakfast
sandwiches.
>> Tom: Next week on
"Marketplace"...
We'll help you hold onto your
cash!
We reveal who's got their hand
in your pocket.
>> I'm just flabbergasted.
I can't believe that.
>> Tom: Are you really getting
what you pay for?
>> For being hoodwinked into
paying something they don't have
to pay.
>> We'll show you how you can
fight back.
>> I'm very happy with
"Marketplace" and very happy
with myself for doing
something good.
>> So you can stash your cash!